---
layout: post
title: >
    Headers, macros and two-step compilation: avoiding 2000-line files
    [Part 2: Two-step compilation]
tags: PRO2
---

This is the continuation of [Part 1][Headers 1].

## How everything was fine until now
Until now, we used a one-step, one-file compilation. Say, our code was in
a file called `main.cc`, and we wanted to produce an executable `main.x`[^exe].
We fired up a shell and ran:

```shell
$ g++ -o main.x main.cc
```

(You can replace `g++` for `p1++` or `p2++`.)

And it works perfectly. However, the files we used usually didn't contain
more than a hundred lines. Anything more than this quickly becomes a nightmare
to search through and correct. In PRO2, as you may have guessed, problems are
longer, so a solution must be found. Let's say our `main.cc` contains two sets
of functions the ones that compute the result and the ones that handle
Input/Output. We can separate them into two files (we will see later how)
and compile them:
```sh
$ g++ -o main.x main.cc iofuncs.cc
```

However, this is a shortcut, because of...

## Compilation stages
Compiling is not a monolithic process: it can be split into four phases,
each usually performed with a different program (I'll be using
Linux/UNIX programs here):

1. Preprocessing (`cpp`)
2. Compilation (`cc` or `c++`)
3. Assembling (`as`)
4. Linking (`ld`)

When using a compiler, it calls all these programs, and each one does a part of
the compilation process.

(The following subsections are not explained in PRO2 and you do not
have to know them. If you are curious, you can read them; otherwise,
just skip until the next section)

### Preprocessing
I already talked about this stage in [part 1][Headers 1], but let's sum it up:

The preprocessor does a number of operations in the source. These are
basically text manipulation (such as copy-pasting other `#include`d files,
replacing text with macros and selectively erasing parts of the original
code with conditionals).

In fact, this is not strictly C/C++ specific. Other languages, like Objective-C
(which is a superset of C) also need a preprocessor. But languages that
aren't part of the C family, like FORTRAN (yes, these still exists), Pascal,
Ada (yes, all of these still exist) or even assembly technically can be -- and
sometimes are -- preprocessed with the CPP[^cpp].

The program which handles this stage is `cpp`, which on most systems is
a link to the GNU[^GNU] CPP.

To see the output of this stage, without continuing to the rest, use
```sh
$ $COMPILER -E $SOURCES
```

Where `$COMPILER` usually is `cc` or `c++` (see "Compilation" for why we don't
use `gcc` and `g++`), and `$SOURCES` the files you want to compile
(usually ended in `.c` or `.cc` -- or `.cpp`, or `.cxx` or whatever variant
for C++ you prefer). If you don't specify an output with `-o`, the default is
to print it to the console.

### Compilation
This is the true "compilation". Here, a pure C/C++ files enters and an assembly
output exits; this is the only language-specific stage.

The program that handles this depends on the input files:
- If C source: `cc`, which in my system links to `gcc`
- If C++ source: `c++`, which in my system links to `g++`

You may be wondering, why use `cc` and `c++` instead of `gcc` and `g++`?
well because, while GCC (also G++) is the most common compiler, the user may
prefer others, or because the default should be another one: Mac OS X does not
(or at least, discourages) install GCC but Clang as the default compiler, and
in Macs, `cc` is a link to `clang` and `c++` to `clang++` (I think. I don't
have a Mac, so I can't confirm this).

As a matter of fact, in case it wasn't obvious, the compiler does not actually
call `cc`: if you run `clang++ source.cc`, but your `c++` links to `g++`,
the source will still be compiled with `clang++`.

To see the output of this stage, without continuing to the rest, use
```sh
$ $COMPILER -S $SOURCES
```

Where `$SOURCES` are `.c` or `.cc` files. These files will be preprocessed,
but preprocessing an already preprocessed file leaves does nothing. (I dare
you to repeat that sentence quickly five times.) By default, the output will
be named `<sourcename>.s` (for example `main.cc -> main.s`)

### Assembling
The compilation step only produces assembly. While easy translatable to
machine code, it is not actual machine code that the computer can run.
For this we need an assembler: `as`. On most computers `as` is a link
to the GNU[^GNU] assembler. To end in this stage, use
```sh
$ $COMPILER -c $SOURCES
```

(Here `$SOURCES` may be `.cc` files and/or
assembly `.s` files. The result is an object `.o` file)

### Linking
The last step produces "object files": files written in a structured form of
machine language (on Linux, usually ELF) which are almost ready to be executed.

These files contain the result of the compilation of a single file, with
references to the functions and classes that were not in that file. This
step consists on joining all the object files which provide the code for these
references. Since this is the final step, the compiler ends here and no
special flag is needed:
```sh
$ $COMPILER $SOURCES
```

(Here `$SOURCES` may be `.cc`, `.s` or `.o` files)

## Summing up
Let's try to sum up this two-part article:

1. Having a long program in one file is not good.
2. Check which parts you want to split.
3. Create, with the declarations (i.e. only the part which says `int f(int x)`),
    a separate file, called `whatever.hh`, with the following contents:
    ```c++
    #ifndef _WHATEVER_HH
    #define _WHATEVER_HH

    // #includes and declarations

    #endif
    ```
4. Put the definitions (the function body) in a separate file `whatever.cc`.
5. Build with `g++ main.cc whatever.cc`. (The exact command may vary depending
    on your needs.)
6. If you are constantly changing one of the files, create an object file
    with the other with `g++ -c <file>.cc`, and use `g++ <file>.o <file2>.cc`
    instead of the original command. This will speed up compilation.

---

Footnotes:

[^exe]: For some reason, our executables end with `.x` or `.exe`. Since `.exe`
    is too "Windowish" for Linux, it would be a sacrilege, so I prefer `.x`.
    Actually, executables in Linux usually don't have a file extension, so
    instead of `main.x` we would write `main`. My guess is that in PRO1 and
    PRO2 the `.x` is to avoid confusion with the `.cc`.

[^cpp]: Note that, according to the manpage of GNU CPP (`man 1 cpp`):
    > The C preprocessor is intended to be used only with C, C++, and
    > Objective-C source code.  In the past, it has been abused as a general
    > text processor.  It will choke on input which does not obey C's lexical
    > rules.  For example, apostrophes will be interpreted as the beginning
    > character constants, and cause errors.  Also, you cannot rely on it
    > preserving characteristics of the input which are not significant to
    > C-family languages.  If a Makefile is preprocessed, all the hard tabs
    > will be removed, and the Makefile will not work.

    Later, the manual says that "Other Algol-ish programming language" and assembly
    often work. Often is the key word.
    So instead of relying on a tool which explicitly advices not to use it
    on non-C/C++/Obj-C code, the manual suggests to use your own language tools,
    or if it doesn't have any, try using a real text processor like
    GNU[^GNU] [M4][M4].

[^GNU]: You may have noticed that I've used a lot of times "GNU (command)".
    [GNU][GNU] (from recursive "GNU's not Unix") is a project which aims to
    provide open source tools. Most of its tools are development tools or
    operating system tools (in fact, "Linux" only refers to the kernel,
    but the OS full name is GNU/Linux -- Note the "/": Linux is not a GNU
    project), but also has some commonly used user software. A few remarkable
    projects:

    - GNU bash: The most used shell for non-Windows OSes.
    - GNU coreutils: `cp`, `ls`, `rm`, `mkdir`...
    - GNU diffutils: `diff` file differ. Very useful to see differences between
        files.
    - GNU GRUB: Used by most GNU/Linux distributions (notably, Ubuntu) to let
        you choose between Linux and Windows on startup (among other things).
    - GNU tar and GNU gzip: Used for archiving and compressing files.
    - GNU binutils: Assembler (`as`) and linker (`ld`)
    - GCC (GNU Compiler Collection): Compilers for many languages, including
        C (`gcc`) and C++ (`g++`).x
    - GNU Debugger
    - GNU make: Used to automate compilation
    - GNU build system (or autotools): Used to automate automation of
        compilation. Not as good idea as it sounds unless you have a very
        large project
    - GIMP: Well-known and self-descriptive.
    - GNOME:
        Desktop environment, used by quite a few Linux distributions, including
        Ubuntu (until 10.10 and then readopted in 17.10) and Fedora
        (by default). It is competing for the "most used" status with KDE
        (in OpenSuse by default, for example).
    - GNU Emacs: most-used version of the Emacs family of text editors.
    - GNU Octave: MATLAB/MAPLE-like.
    - R: Programming language for scientific computation.
    - GNU Hurd: Not notable, but curios. In fact, it has been nearly abandoned
        until recently due to lack of interest. It's meant to be a kernel, to
        replace Linux.
    - Many other projects that start with GNU, and some that don't. See
        the full list at
        [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_GNU_packages) or
        the [GNU website](https://www.gnu.org/manual/blurbs.html).
        In general, if you're using for coding in Linux, there's a good chance
        it is part of GNU. You can check running, for example,
        `[prog] --version` and checking if the first line begins with "GNU".

*[GRUB]: GRand Unified Bootloader
*[GIMP]: GNU Image Manipulation Program
*[GNOME]: [Some horribly complicate and outdated acronym]

[Headers 1]: {{ site.base_url }}{% post_url 2018-02-24-headers-1 %}
[M4]: https://www.gnu.org/software/m4/m4.html
[GNU]: https://www.gnu.org/